---
eip: 5516
title: Soulbound, Multi Token Standard.
description: An interface for non-transferrable NFTs binding to an Ethereum account for standardized blockchain-based academic certification.
author: Lucas Martín Grasso Ramos(@LucasGrasso), Matias Arazi(@MatiArazi)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5516-soulbound-multi-token-standard/10485
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-08-19
requires: 165, 1155
---

## Abstract

This is a standard interface for non fungible, double signature, multi-token, Soulbound Token standard. It was inspired by the main characteristics of the EIP-1155 token and by the [article](https://vitalik.ca/general/2022/01/26/soulbound.html) and [paper](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4105763) published by Vitalik Butherin, in which benefits and potential use-cases of SoulBound Tokens (SBT) were presented.

## Motivation

We found a potential problem, the lack of credibility and faithfulness in online certifications, and imagined a solution, inspired by the everyday more common articles and mentions of Soulbound Tokens. We set to combine the best characteristics of each standardized EIP with the sole objective of elaborating a solid and useful token standard.

Current Soulbound/Accountbound token standards like EIP-4973 require a separate contract to be deployed for each token type or collection. This places a lot of redundant bytecode on the Ethereum blockchain and limits certain functionality by the nature of separating each token contract into its own permissioned address.
This design allows for multiple token types to be transferred at once, saving on transaction costs. Trading of multiple tokens can be built on top of this standard and it removes the need to “approve” individual token contracts separately.
It is also easy to describe and mix multiple fungible or non-fungible token types in a single contract.

The purpose of this document is to create a Double-Signature SBT standard by creating consensus around a maximally eip-1555 compatible interface definition. 

_modified from [eip-1555 Motivation](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155#motivation)_

### Characteristics

* The NFT will be non-transferable after the initial transfer(Soulbound/Accountbound Token-SBT).
* Is backwards compatible with EIP-1155.
* Double Signature.
* Multi-Token.
* Semi-Fungible standard.

### Applications

* ERC1155 Soulbound NFTs.
* Academy.
* Certifications.
* Smart Contract certifications (Code auditories).
* POAP.
* And more...

## Specification
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

**Smart contracts implementing the SBTERC1155DS standard MUST implement all of the functions in the SBTERC1155DS interface.**

**Smart contracts implementing the SBTERC1155DS standard MUST implement the ERC-165 supportsInterface function and and MUST return the constant value true if 0x812b9fae is passed through the interfaceID argument.They also MUST implement the EIP-1155 Interface and MUST return the constant value true if 0xd9b67a26 is passed through the interfaceID argument. Furthermore, they MUST implement the EIP-1155 Metadata interface, and MUST return the constant value true if 0x0e89341c is passed through the interfaceID argument.**

_See [EIP-1155 Specification](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155#specification)_

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0

pragma solidity ^0.8.4;

/**
    @title Soulbound, Multi-Token standard.
    @notice Interface of the eip-5516 
    Note: The ERC-165 identifier for this interface is 0x0f7946c0.
 */

interface IEIP5516 {

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `newOwner` claims or rejects pending `id`.
     */
    event TokenClaimed(address indexed operator, address indexed newOwner, uint256 id);

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `from` transfers token under `id` to every address at `to[]`.
     */
    event TransferMulti(address indexed from, address[] indexed to, uint256 amount, uint256 indexed id);

    /**
     * @dev Get tokens owned by a given address
     */
    function tokensFrom(address from) external view returns (uint256[] memory);

    /**
     * @dev Get tokens marked as pending of a given address
     */
    function pendingFrom(address from) external view returns (uint256[] memory);
    
    /**
     * @dev Claims or Reject pending `_id` from address `_account`.
     *
     * Requirements:
     * - `account` cannot be the zero address.
     * - `account` MUST have a pending token under `id` at the moment of call.
     * - `account` MUST not own a token under `id` at the moment of call.
     *
     * Emits a {TokenClaimed} event.
     *
     */
    function claimOrReject(uint256 _id, bool _action) external;

    /**
     * @dev Transfers `_id` token from `_from` to every address at `_to[]`.
     *
     * Requirements:
     *
     * - `_from` MUST be the creator(minter) of `id`.
     * - All addresses in `to[]` MUST be non-zero.
     * - All addresses in `to[]` MUST have the token `id` under `_pendings`.
     * - All addresses in `to[]` MUST not own a token type under `id`.
     *
     * Emits a {TransfersMulti} event.
     *
     */
    function batchTransfer (address from, address[] memory to, uint256 id, uint256 amount, bytes memory data) external;

}
```

## Rationale

### SBT as an extension to IERC1155
We believe that Soulbound Token serves as a specialized subset of the existing ERC1155 tokens. The advantage of such design is seamless compatibility of Soulbound Token with existing NFT services. Service providers can treat SBTs like NFTs and do not need to make drastic changes to their existing codebase.
Making the standard compatible with EIP-1155 also allows for SBT binding to Smart Contracts, and this can allow for a whole new world of possibilities.

### Double-Signature
The Double-Signature functionality was implemented to prevent the receival of unwanted tokens. As this standard is built for academic certification, this functionality mimics the real world: You have to accept a degree for it to be yours, for example. It symbolizes a handshake between receiver and sender, implying that **both** parties agree on the token transfer.

### Custom error messages.
After testing the standard, we found out that using custom errors was way more gas efficient than using require()
statements.

### Metadata.
The EIP1155 Metadata Interface was implemented for more compatibility with EIP-1155.   

_See [EIP-1155 Metadata](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155#metadata)_ 

### Guaranteed log trace
>As the Ethereum ecosystem continues to grow, many dapps are relying on traditional databases and explorer API services to retrieve and categorize data. The ERC-1155 standard guarantees that event logs emitted by the smart contract will provide enough data to create an accurate record of all current token balances. A database or explorer may listen to events and be able to provide indexed and categorized searches of every ERC-1155 token in the contract.

_quoted from [EIP-1555](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155#guaranteed-log-trace)_

eip-5516 extends this idea to the Double Signature function: The `{TokenClaimed}` event logs all the necessary information of a `ClaimOrReject(...)` function call, storing relevant information about the actions performed by the user. This also applies to the `batchTransfer(...)` function: It emits the `{TransferMulti}` event and logs necessary data.

### Exception handling
Given the non-transferability property of SBTs, if a user’s keys to an account or a contract get compromised or rotated, a user may lose the ability to associate themselves with the token. In some cases, this can be the desired effect. Therefore, SBT implementers should build re-issuance and revocation processes(burn-like functions) to enable recourse. We recommend implementing strictly decentralized, permissionless, and censorship-resistant re-issuance processes.  
This document abstains from proposing a standardized form of exception handling in cases where user keys are compromised or rotated.  
**Despite this, given the multi owner characteristic of eip-1555 compliant interfaces and contracts, this allows for SBTs to bind to multiple accounts, fixing this potential issue.**

Multi-owned SBTs can also be issued to a contract account that implements a multi-signature functionality, this can be achieved via the [ERC1155 Token Receiver interface]( https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155#erc-1155-token-receiver), as defined in eip-1555.

_modified from [eip-4973](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4973#exception-handling)_

### Multi token
The multi token functionality was used in order for easier organization, all emitted tokens are stored in the same contract, preventing redundant bytecode from being deployed to the blockchain. It also facilitates transfer to token issuers, given that all issued tokens are stored and can be accessed under the same address.

### batchTransfer(...) function
The token standard supports a batch transfer function to multiple addresses, and this was made to ease the transfer to multiple people, making it more gas-efficient and easier for the users.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal is fully backward compatible with EIP-1155.

## Security Considerations
There are no security considerations related directly to the implementation of this standard.

## References

**Standards**
* [EIP-1155 Multi Token Standard](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155)
* [EIP-165 Standard Interface Detection](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-165)
* Tim Daubenschütz, Raphael Roullet, "EIP-4973: Account-bound Tokens [DRAFT]," Ethereum Improvement Proposals, no. 4973, April 2022. [Online serial]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4973.

* [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/)
* [RFC 2119 Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

**Implementations**
* [EIP-5516 Reference Implementation](https://github.com/ZertiApp/Zerti/blob/main/contracts/EIP5516.sol)
* [Zerti](https://dev.zerti.com.ar/feed) (Link to Rinkeby testnet test application)

**Articles & Discussions**
* [Decentralized Society: Finding Web3's Soul](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4105763)
* [Soulbound](https://vitalik.ca/general/2022/01/26/soulbound.html)

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).